[BLOG] Pydata/Sparse: Maintenance and docs overhaul (#877)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/pydata-sparse-maintenance-and-docs-overhaul.md

I was given "Admin" rights to `sparse` in the host (`Read the Docs`), and I activated the "trigger builds from pull requests". This is the feature that lets us preview the documentation builds with each commit in `GitHub` with a link.

The tricky part was that Hameer, the owner of the project on `GitHub`, also needed to link his `Read the Docs` account to `GitHub`.

If I had started by deploying `sparse` directly, without installing my own fork first, it would have been impossible to find the missing part. The reason being that I didn't have access to all the project settings on `GitHub`. But I knew what was needed: to connect both accounts (`GitHub` and `Read the Docs`). This part was a good troubleshooting exercise.

At the time of writing, the new website is available only under the "latest" version on `Read the Docs`. The stable version is still the `Sphinx` website, as the next release is still not ready. But it will be part of the next release.

> The resulting documentation site can be seen [here.](https://sparse-nd--747.org.readthedocs.build/en/latest/)

Reviewer: Seems like you corrected the last part of the URL but forgot the first part. 😅 

```suggestion
The resulting documentation site can be seen [here.](https://sparse.pydata.org/en/latest/)
```

Author: Yes I saw it too late!

### Restructured the documentation to match Divio's

Once the documentation website was working with the new framework, I needed to reorganize it. The objective was to use the documentation guidelines from [`Divio's`](https://docs.divio.com/documentation-system/)

These Divio’s principles state that the documentation should be structured in four sections. Each section should cover a different purpose and should be written differently. These sections are tutorials, how-to guides, explanations and reference (API).

The purpose of tutorials is learning. How-to guides should solve problems. Explanation pages should lead to understanding. And the reference should be the area where the comprehensive technical information is.

With these principles I divided the original content to match these guidelines. I also added the section for "contributing" and a specific section for the introduction.

### Added missing docstrings

The final requirement related to the website was to add the missing docstrings so the API is fully documented.

## Maintenance tasks

> ### Added community tools to repository on GitHub

Author: Thanks again. :)

The Release Drafter is a GitHub action that can be found in "Marketplace Actions". It must be added to the repository with a YAML workflow file. It is stored in ` .github/workflows/release-drafter.yml`. After that, it needs to be configured with another YAML file, now with the name `.github/release-drafter.yml`.

Both files need to be in the `main` branch already in order to start working. Because of this, it is easier to add these files directly to the repository on GitHub than with a pull request. But that can be done only by the owners of the repositories. When someone who is not the owner of the repository creates the pull request to add them, the workflow fails. The pull request must be merged like that. Once the files are in the default branch, the Release Drafter starts working.

With all this, a document that is the release draft keeps updating itself automaticaly when pull requests are merged. I included the option to categorize pull requests and it does it by setting labels to the pull requests, depending on their titles. For this, I added the "Autolabeler" funcionality.

> ### Improved and expanded benchmarks

Author: The link to CodSpeed docs is on line 149, when I start writing about this library. Should I move things around?

> ### Improved and expanded benchmarks

Reviewer: I just mean that linking docs to things you experienced might be useful.

> ### Improved and expanded benchmarks

Reviewer: Specific pages in the docs, I mean.

> ### Improved and expanded benchmarks

Author: I added more links as you suggested. Thanks for that.

---

> title: "Pydata sparse: Maintenance and docs overhaul"

Author: I tried `sparse` but couldn't make it work, so I took the second option.

authors: [dea-leon]
published: September, 2024
description: "Making the documentation more user friendly and how benchmarks were integrated in pydata sparse."
category: [PyData ecosystem]
featuredImage:
src: /posts/pydata-sparse-maintenance-and-docs-overhaul/featured.png
alt:
"Cube representing a sparse array with the word sparse on the left."
hero:
imageSrc: /posts/pydata-sparse-maintenance-and-docs-overhaul/hero.svg
imageAlt:
"Cube representing a sparse array with the word sparse on the left."

---

Hi, I'm [Dea María Léon](https://github.com/DeaMariaLeon). I had the pleasure to work at Quansight Labs for three months. The objective was to perform maintenance tasks and a documentation overhaul to the `Pydata.sparse` project.

In this post, I'll describe the work during that time. From now on, I'll refer to the project only as `sparse`.

---

> - [Introduction to pydata sparse](#introduction-to-pydata-sparse)

Author: Done

- [Documentation overhaul](#documentation-overhaul)

  - [Convert the documentation website to Material for MkDocs.](#Convert-the-documentation-website-to-material-for-mkdocs)
  - [Deployment to Read the Docs.](#deployment-to-read-the-docs)
  - [Restructured the documentation to match Divio's ](#restructured-the-documentation-to-match-Divio's)
  - [Added missing docstrings](#added-missing-docstrings)

- [Maintenance tasks](#maintenance-tasks)

  - [Added contributor experience tools to repository on GitHub](#added-contributor-experience-tools-to-repository-on-GitHub)
  - [Improved and expanded benchmarks.](#improved-and-expanded-benchmarks)

- [Acknowledges](#acknowledges)

- [References](#references)

---

## Introduction to pydata sparse

> `sparse` is a library that implements operations for sparse arrays with two or more dimensions.

Author: True!!

Like I said earlier, I needed to install `CodSpeed`. This is done by adding the `pytest` extension `pytest-codspeed` as a development dependency. Then, I added a `GitHub Actions` workflow to run the benchmarks and report the results to `CodSpeed`. The `sparse` repository needed to be imported to `CodSpeed` and enabled as well. To do this, one must have Admin rights of the organization on GitHub.

Finally, I added benchmarks so they could be run by `CodSpeed`. The benchmarks are run whenever a pull request is opened and with each commit to it. A report is generated and posted as a comment on the pull request (on `GitHub`). The report has links to the analyses and graphs of the results in `CodSpeed` cloud.

Regarding the code of the benchmarks, `CodSpeed` works with `pytest` as I mentioned. So, we can use parametrized fixtures. The fixture `benchmark` runs `CodSpeed`.

We are now benchmarking matmul, elemwise and tensordot with `CodSpeed`. We are also comparing elemwise when using `Numba` vs. using `Finch`.

## Acknowledgements

I would like to thank:

Hameer Abbas who was my guide during this time.

> Mateus Sokól, who also helped me very kindly in the beginning of the project.

Author: Sorry about that!

> Mateus Sokól, who also helped me very kindly in the beginning of the project.

Reviewer: > Sorry about that!

No worries. 😄
